The predictive power of big data will transform society: Canada 3.0 forum
Rose Simone
Rose Simone
News services
878 words
25 April 2012
Guelph Mercury
GMER
First
B11
English
Copyright (c) 2012 Guelph Mercury.
STRATFORD -- The software programs will predict what you are likely to want to read. They know which movies you are most likely to watch. They can suggest who you might want to be friends with in an online social network.

Spookily, the massive amounts of data being put online might also predict the future, participants at the opening of the Canada 3.0 digital media forum in Stratford were told on Tuesday.

Huge data sets known as "big data" are generated as people all over the world put more information online. Mining this data is already having a huge impact on our lives, said Mark Barrenechea, the new chief executive of Open Text in Waterloo.

About 2,000 people are attending the two-day forum that includes more than 100 speakers, plus displays of the latest digital media technologies.

This year's event, hosted by the Canadian Digital Media Network, also features a delegation from Brazil. Meanwhile, Canada's Governor General David Johnston and Cambridge MP Gary Goodyear, the federal minister of state for science and technology, spoke to the audience through a live feed from Brazil, where they are taking part in a 10-day trip to that country while the Brazilian delegates are here.

David Fransen, Canada's consul general in Los Angeles, was also a keynote speaker and talked about the importance of the partnerships being formed by Canadian digital media companies in California.

Barrenechea, who arrived from Silicon Valley in California in January to take his new position at Open Text, said we have now officially reached "critical mass" in terms of the amount of information people are putting online.

The sheer amount of information is mind-boggling. Barrenechea cited estimates that people are generating 2.5 exabytes of computer data (an exabyte is one quintillion bytes) every day. This includes text, pictures and videos that are being posted; market transactions; information from mobile devices and scientific projects. Also, more than 50 per cent of the world's traditional newspapers, magazines and broadcast media are now putting their information online, Barrenechea added.

This means that every two days, humans are putting more data online than what has been put into print since the dawn of recorded history, he said.

This information is being mined, and the most common use has been in marketing. Companies like Facebook or Google use it to generate targeted ads aimed at people's likes or dislikes. It is estimated that about 70 per cent of the movies that people pick on Netflix came from a "recommendation engine," Barrenechea added.

But the software is now so sophisticated, it can even be used to generate things like news stories, he said.

He gave the example of Narrative Science, one of the companies that sells automated journalism software to publications. The software can do things such as pull together a sports story based on the scores and events of a baseball game, or generate a story about a company's earnings based on earnings report data. It has even been used to generate stories on what people on Twitter are tending to say about an election candidate.

The software can also be used to predict flu epidemics or other global events, Barrenechea said.

One example is the Global Public health Intelligence Network set up by Canada as an internet-based early warning system for pandemics. The software will check news sites and blogs in different languages from all over the world, looking for words and information that might be a "flag" for the next big pandemic. If a small news site in China reports that three people died of a mysterious illness, that might trigger an early warning, Barrenechea said.

Barrenechea cited the example of Kalev Leetaru, a researcher from the University of Illinois, who was able to feed information from an archive of 100 million global news articles spanning a quarter-century into a supercomputer, looking for "mood" signals in the behaviours and events of people. He was able to spot indicators that might have been useful for predicting the revolutions that happened in the Arab world or even clues as to where Osama bin Laden was hiding.

Meanwhile, an Australian physicist, Graham Turner, took data on economic growth and consumption trends from 1970 to 2000 to run computer models on what will happen if the human race continues to consume resources at the current rate. The computer models not only matched what actually has happened so far, but also confirmed a previous study which indicated that at this rate the world is headed for economic collapse around the year 2030.

"With big data comes big responsibilities," Barrenechea said, noting that access to such information can also be used for nefarious purposes, such as stopping a popular uprising. But there are also huge opportunities to contribute to the collective good, he added.

Actor Pascal Langlois performs in a suit that allows motion capture cameras that surround him to feed information to a computer that generates a digital character that moves in real time with him at the Canada 3.0 digital media forum at the Stratford Rotary Complex, Tuesday. Mathew McCarthy, news services

Toronto Star Newspapers Limited

Document GMER000020120425e84p0000a